.. _batterychargingexample-battery-charging-example:

Battery Charging Example
========================
Lead acid batteries are very heavy.  But they are cheaper than lithium ion
batteries and this is why they are used in a lot of off-grid electrical systems.

.. image:: https://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301bb0820445e970d-pi
    :target: https://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html
    :align: center

A large lead-acid battery is made up of a set of smaller lead-acid batteries
connected together in series.  These smaller batteries are called cells.

.. image:: _static/cells_in_series.PNG
    :target: https://chargetek.com/images/pdfs/equal.pdf
    :align: center

Each cell contains two terminals, and each terminal is connected to a plate that
reaches down into a bath of sulphuric acid (H2SO4) and water (H2O).  There is a
positive and a negative terminal.  The positive terminal of a cell is made up of
lead dioxide (PbO2) and the negative terminal is made out of lead (Pb).

A battery is a chemical reaction that wants to happen, but can't until there is
a path for electrons to flow from one material to another.  As a result, there
is a voltage potential expressed across the positive and negative terminals of
the battery.  If an electrical device is connected across these terminals an
electron path is made, the battery can begin its chemical reaction.  As a side
effect the electrical device is powered on.  The flow of current leaves the
positive terminal and enters the negative terminal.  When this happens the
battery is said to discharge.

.. image:: https://circuitglobe.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/lead-acid-cell-112.jpg
    :target: https://circuitglobe.com/lead-acid-battery.html
    :align: center

Charging of a battery occurs when current is forced to flow in the opposite
direction: current leaves the negative terminal and enters the positive
terminal. This causes the chemical reaction to reverse, sequestering the
electrons back into the various materials of the battery.  You can charge a
battery with a battery charger.

.. image:: https://circuitglobe.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/recharging-of-lead-acid-battery.jpg
    :target: https://circuitglobe.com/lead-acid-battery.html
    :align: center

.. note::
  
   If you aren't familiar with the terminology of electricity, imagine a water
   tower.  The water is trying to get to the ground, due to gravity,
   but it is held in place by the walls of the tower.  This means that there is a
   potential for the water to flow, the height of the tower determines how much
   energy is stored within it.  The higher the tower, the higher the potential
   energy.  Voltage is analogous to height of the water tower.

   .. image:: https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcTtYw4fJS9o3meW9yv5ZGJ5enzVpyJ0sfw5L45UifmATQERiArD
       :target: https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcTtYw4fJS9o3meW9yv5ZGJ5enzVpyJ0sfw5L45UifmATQERiArD
       :align: center

   Now imagine connecting a pipe from the tower to the ground, and letting the
   water flow through it.  This flow is like current in an electrical system, and
   the pipe width would limit that flow, so that would be like an electrical load.

   Our battery is like a water tower; if no pipe is connected, current can't flow.
   If a pipe is connected, it can, and the energy of the battery reduces just like
   the potential energy of our water tower would reduce as it's water leaves it
   through a pipe.  If you were to push the current back into the pipe, by
   connecting a higher water tower, or buy just driving the current back up the
   tube with a pump, you would cause the potential of the water tower to increase.
   We would be charging the tower.

   As mentioned before, a battery is made up of stacking cells in series.  Think of
   that as a very tall water tower made up of stacked shorter water towers.  You
   can increase their potential energy by stacking them this way.

As a lead acid battery is discharged, a crust of lead sulphate (PbSO4) forms on the
plates.  This crust reduces the surface area of the lead plates exposed to the
acid, reducing its ability to react and drive current.  There are charging
techniques which can remove this sulphate, by bubbling the acid.

.. image:: https://stevedmarineconsulting.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/082504179.jpg
    :target: https://stevedmarineconsulting.com/sulfation-too-many-batteries-die-an-unnecessarily-early-death-from-this-phenomenon/
    :align: center

:ref:`back to examples <examples>`
