*Rabbit Disconnection Exception*
= Observe =
  *What defines Success?*
  We relay on the pika library so that it doesn't suddenly stroke-out with
  exceptions (> 15 minutes to reproduce).
  
  Make a new version of the networking software based on the examples provided
  from the pika docs instead of the docs provided by RabbitMq

  *What is the problem?*
  I might have made a big mistake picking pika (RabbitMq).  It seems that the
  tutorial written in the RabbitMq docs and the code listed on the pika official
  documentation are very different.  They have moved from an old way of writing
  to a "new" way of writing RabbitMq code using callbacks.
  
  It seems that pika is programmed this way.  It routinely disconnects and
  issues exceptions.  A fast running program will work, but a slow running
  program will fail.
  
  The problem takes too long to reproduce, so, we won't address it.  Instead we
  will aim the investigation at making it occur sooner.

  *Evidence that informs Assumptions:*
  The program fails after 13:28 minutes.  Yesterday it was failing sooner
  A second test broke at ~20 minutes
  
  One two bots (WSL):
    pika.exceptions.ConnectionClosed: (-1, "ConnectionResetError(104, 'Connection reset by peer')")
  
  The other two bots:
    pika.exceptions.ChannelClosed
  
= Orient =
  *Symptoms:*
  
  *Questions for Rabbit Disconnection Exception:*
    Can I understand their code?
    Can I find a way to make the problem fail sooner. 
    Can you simplify your test?
    Do you have enough information?
    What recently changed?

  *Assumptions:*
  * 

= Decide =
  *Idea/Hypotheses for Rabbit Disconnection Exception: >=5*
  * [ ] Reproduce the issue; time it [too long]
  * [ ] To reproduce it, shut off the snoop network after a set amound of time
        and wait for it to fail [didn't work]
  * [ ] Search the exception online; try their ideas
  * [ ] Port any solution back into the miros_rabbit package
  * [ ] Port solution back into the pika docs in your library
  * [ ] Possible re-write of all networking code is required
  * [ ] It seems that the heartbeat_interval might be causing the issue
  * [ ] Reproduce the pika examples from the pika docs, not the RabbitMq docs,
        get something working, then roll out an entirely new network subsystem.
  
  *Chosen Idea/Hypothesis*
  Try to speed time before the issue occurs
  * Reproduce the pika examples from the pika docs, not the RabbitMq docs,
    get something working, then roll out an entirely new network subsystem.

  *Plan to Expand-on-Idea/Disprove-Hypothesis*

= Act =

